Initial version of the proposal of SYCL/DPC++ language features control (#1793)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/ControllingSYCLLanguageFeatures.md

# Controlling SYCL/DPC++ language features

This documents aims to describe a mechanism which is used to control (i.e.
enable or disable) different SYCL/DPC++ language and library features, like
version of SYCL/DPC++ standard to use, set of extensions to use, etc.

## Controlling SYCL/DPC++ standard version

In order to control the language standard to compile for, the following options
can be used:

`-sycl-std=<value>`, `--sycl-std=<value>`, `--sycl-std <value>`

SYCL language standard to compile for.

Possible values:

- `2017`, '121', `1.2.1`, `sycl-1.2.1`: corresponds to SYCL 1.2.1
  specification, see [SYCL Registry] for more details and the specification
  text.

  Note: setting `-sycl-std` option automatically implies a particular C++
  standard version to be set.

  **TODO**: do we need to specify which exact version is implied by which
  `-sycl-std` value? AFAIK, SYCL spec only specifies minimum required C++

>   version, which is C++11 and we set C++17 in our implementation

Author: I actually like a suggestion from @rolandschulz:

`-sycl-std` doesn't imply any particular C++ standard version to be set and default version is selected (whichever default is for clang). If the default doesn't work as expected, user should use a combination of `-sycl-std` + `-std` to specify both standards.
If some combination of `-sycl-std` and `-std` is not supported, then user will see an error: this could be done by some macro checks within SYCL headers, for example

`-std=sycl-1.2.1` in turn would imply some C++ standard to be configured. Since the spec doesn't tie us to a particular version and only specifies some minimum version, this option would imply _some_ C++ standard, which is at least the minimum version according to the spec.

What do you think?

>   version, which is C++11 and we set C++17 in our implementation

Reviewer: I think it makes sense. Just a question: What happens if `-sycl-std=2020` is used on a clang version that doesn't support C++17 ? I think that should fail. Obviously it cannot happen on DPCPP, but it would be good if at least the flag behavior is documented for all cases so other implementations can do the same.

- `dpcpp-0.7`: corresponds to DPC++ 0.7.

  Basically, `-sycl-std=dpcpp-0.7` implies support for SYCL 1.2.1 specification,
  bunch of extension enabled and `-std=c++17`

  See [oneAPI Specification] for more details and the specification text.

[SYCL Registry]: https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/
[oneAPI Specification]: https://spec.oneapi.com/

Note: it is possible to change C++ version independently of SYCL/DPC++ standard

> version if that is needed: `-sycl-std=1.2.1 -std=c++14`, for example.

Reviewer: ```cpp
then it is expected to see compilation errors. 
```

Its unclear whether this is just going to be some random C++ compilation error because using the wrong interface (e.g., lack of CTAD would cause strange template errors) or there will be a specific "This version of C++ is not supported by this SYCL version". I would rather have the explicit error message, if possible.

`-std=<value>`, `--std=<value>`, `--std <value>`

> One more way to specify SYCL/DPC++ standard version is to use general clang
> option which allows to specify language standard to compile for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One more way to specify SYCL/DPC++ standard version is to use a general clang
option, which allows to specify language standard to compile for.
```

Supported values (besides listed in clang documentation/help):

- `sycl-1.2.1`, `sycl-2017`: corresponds to `-sycl-std=1.2.1`
- `dpcpp-0.7`: corresponds to `-sycl-std=dpcpp-0.7`

> Please note that if you specify `-std` flag several times, only the latest
> value takes effect. This means, that if you want to specifiy particular C++
> standard version instead of some default one implied by SYCL/DPC++ standard,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that if you specify `-std` flag several times, only the last
value takes effect. This means, that if you want to specify a particular C++
standard version instead of some default one implied by the SYCL/DPC++ standard,
```

you have to use two separate options: `-sycl-std` and `-std`.

**TODO**. Please let me know if we don't want to go with this approach at all.
Note on motivation: clang accepts OpenCL standards via `-std` option,
as well as `cuda` and `hip`. So, values mentioned above were added for
consistency and for providing some additional aliases.

## Controlling SYCL/DPC++ language extensions

> Both SYCL and DPC++ has several extensions or proposals about how to expand

Reviewer: My understanding is that DPC++ *is* a set of extensions over SYCL 1.2.1 , so defining DPC++ as the  -sycl-std version should simply be enabling a set of extensions on top of the sycl-2015 profile?

Reviewer: Some DPC++ extensions could become SYCL optional features. The sycl-2020 profile could enable some optional features if the device supports them. So any DPC++ extension that has been included on the SYCL 2020 document but it is only supported on some devices will be enabled when -sycl-std=sycl2020 is set. The -sycl-std=dpcpp-0.XX profile would only add those extensions not yet on SYCL specification document. I guess is a larger discussion than this PR.

standard with new features, which might be vendor- or device-specific.

Each extension can be separately enabled or disabled depending on user
preferences. List of extensions enabled by default is controlled by SYCL/DPC++
standard version.

Enabling/disabling extensions is done via single `-sycl-ext` option. It accepts
comma-separated list of extension names prefixed with `+` or `-` to indicate
whether particular extension should be enabled or disabled.

Example: `-sycl-ext=+EXTENSION_NAME1,-EXTENSION_NAME2` - this option specifies
that `EXTENSION_NAME1` extension should be enabled and `EXTENSION_NAME2` should
be disabled.

When particular extension is enabled, the compiler automatically defines a macro
with the same name, i.e. if `-sycl-ext=EXTENSION_NAME1` command line option was
specified, then `EXTENSION_NAME1` macro will be defined.

**TODO**: update table with supported extensions with identifiers (macro or

> compiler options), which should be used to enable/disable them.

Reviewer 2: Sounds great, maybe the macro checks could read `__has_sycl_<extension>` for grouping/readability with other `__has_feature` and `__has_cpp_<feature>` options in the standard? https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/feature_test

+1 for a table to find flags, macros and reference.

  actual compiler extension and change the implementation without any
  updates in compiler/toolchain interface (command line options)

- Enabling/disabling extension via this option could automatically define
  corresponding macro, which can be used by header-only extensions to hide
  new classes/APIs and other stuff introduced by the extension to avoid it
  being accidentally used

Cons:
- Without list of known extensions, we cannot emit proper diagnostic that some
  unknown extension was enabled just because of the typo in its spelling

  - Potentially, we could introduce one more option, which will allow to check
    that list of enabled/disabled extensions doesn't contain anything unknown,
    but this again means change of the compiler for each even header-only
    extension

- According to [Predefined macros] section from [SYCL_INTEL_extension_api]
  proposal, extension-specific macro should not only be defined, but also has a
  value in particular form. How can we automatically put any meaningful value
  in there without having predefined list of known extensions? Do we need to
  extend the format so user can specify which version of the extension is

>   needed (`-sycl-ext=+EXTENSION_NAME1=123`)?

Reviewer: Having a multiple-option flag can be problematic for build systems, or for users that have scripts to generate command line flags. Is there an example of this type of flag currently in clang/llvm ?

Author: Documented my intent about several occurrences of `-sycl-ext` in 349ec2df85e9908d0980b818a7c26dafe04d3cf0

Reviewer: Trying to use this combination of -sycl-ext accurately on a build system like CMake could be difficult. I don't know enough about it to answer it, maybe I am just being overly cautious. 

```quote
Moreover, the intent is to allow to pass -sycl-ext flag several times: the final list of extensions will be calculated as sum of values for each occurrence of the flag.
```

This can be confusing. Usually on the compiler command line, the latest command is the winner. However, now you have to go and find the entire command line and count all occurences to figure out which extension is enabled and which one is disabled? When you use it directly on the command line may be fine, but when you use this from some generator (again, like CMake, but may as well be some python script), you may end up having some unexpected outcomes.

##### Separate flag for each extension

Generic form of command line option to control SYCL/DPC++ language extension
is `-f[no-]sycl-extension-name`. For example, `-fsycl-usm` flag enables support
for [USM] extension, `-fno-sycl-usm` disables it.

[USM]: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/USM/USM.adoc

Flags controlling the same extension might be set multiple times in the same
compiler invocation: the last one overrides previous flag.

Pros:
- We will automatically get a diagnostic if user made a typo in an option name,
  which corresponds to a particular extension

Cons:
- Seems like a significant amount of new flags coming to the compiler
- Harder to prototype and implement new extensions

> - What about header-only extensions? Bunch of compiler options which are only

Reviewer: The current list of extensions may be large, but once the next SYCL version is out, most of them will simply be the new "normal" under sycl-2020. I don't think is a huge burden for users to set them individually. Until there is a complete 2020 implementation, using the -sycl-std=dpcpp-07 should set all relevant not-target specific extensions, so the user should only have to add those extensions that are target specific. That list should not be that large, unless I am mistaken, so having separate flags should be fine.

Reviewer: Depending on how much of dpc++ gets upstreamed to llvm, this may be a long time. I would assume, however, a large part of the changes and extensions will stabilize. There is a large gap between SYCL 1.2.1 and DPC++ that will be much smaller after SYCL 2020.

# Controlling SYCL/DPC++ language features

This documents aims to describe a mechanism which is used to control (i.e.
enable or disable) different SYCL/DPC++ language and library features, like
version of SYCL/DPC++ standard to use, set of extensions to use, etc.

## Controlling SYCL/DPC++ standard version

In order to control the language standard to compile for, the following options
can be used:

`-sycl-std=<value>`, `--sycl-std=<value>`, `--sycl-std <value>`

SYCL language standard to compile for.

Possible values:

- `2017`, `121`, `1.2.1`, `sycl-1.2.1`: corresponds to SYCL 1.2.1
  specification, see [SYCL Registry] for more details and the specification
  text.

- `dpcpp-0.8`: corresponds to DPC++ version documented in oneAPI 0.8

  Basically, `-sycl-std=dpcpp-0.8` implies support for SYCL 1.2.1 specification

>   and bunch of extension enabled.

Author: Thanks, fixed in 385b6a475f5237783db722f891bd05234b707919

  See [oneAPI Specification] for more details and the specification text.

[SYCL Registry]: https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/
[oneAPI Specification]: https://spec.oneapi.com/

Note: `-sycl-std` **doesn't** imply any C++ standard version to be set,

> which means that some default value will be selected. If by some reason, that

Author: Thanks, fixed in 385b6a475f5237783db722f891bd05234b707919

default version is not a desired one,  it is possible to change C++ version
independently of SYCL/DPC++ standard version via specifying additional option:
`-sycl-std=1.2.1 -std=c++14`, for example.

If SYCL/DPC++ standard version and C++ standard version (either default value
for the compiler or one which was explicitly set via `-std`) are incompatible,
then it is expected to see compilation errors. Incompatible means that C++
standard version is less than minimum required by SYCL/DPC++ standard.

`-std=<value>`, `--std=<value>`, `--std <value>`

One more way to specify SYCL/DPC++ standard version is to use a general clang
option, which allows to specify language standard to compile for.

> Supported values (besides listed in clang documentation/help):

Author: This is done at purpose, as I don't think that each value from `-sycl-std` fits `-std` option. I.e. with `-sycl-std` option it is clear that we are talking about SYCL (or about DPC++) standard, while for `-std` it might be as well CUDA, C++, HIP, OpenCL, etc. For example, `2017` might be confusing: is it C++17 or SYCL 1.2.1?

> Supported values (besides listed in clang documentation/help):

Reviewer 3: Yes only options starting with `sycl-` or `dpcpp-` should work for with `-std`.

- `sycl-1.2.1`, `sycl-2017`: corresponds to `-sycl-std=1.2.1`
- `dpcpp-0.8`: corresponds to `-sycl-std=dpcpp-0.8`

Note: setting SYCL or DPC++ standard version via `-std` option automatically
implies some C++ standard version to be set, according to requirements of
corresponding SYCL/DPC++ specification. For example, for SYCL 1.2.1 it would be

> at least C++11, while for DPC++ 0.8 it would be C++17.

Author: Included second clarification into the document in 385b6a475f5237783db722f891bd05234b707919
